Sync vs. async guide (#553)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Sync-Vs-Async.rst

.. _SyncAsync:

> Synchronous vs. asynchronous clients

Reviewer: I think we should be more explicit here:

```suggestion
Synchronous vs. asynchronous service clients
```

--------------------

Async calls can be made from anywhere without running the risk of blocking other ROS and non-ROS processes.
This is not the case for sync calls, which is why async is the more correct and safe option.

An asynchronous client will immediately return a ``future``, a value that indicates whether the call and response is finished (not the value of the response itself), after sending a request to a service.
The returned ``future`` may be queried for a response at any time.

Since sending a request doesn’t block anything, a loop can be used to both spin ``rclpy`` and check ``future`` in the same thread, for example:

.. code-block::

    while rclpy.ok():
        rclpy.spin_once(node)
        if future.done():
            #Get response

The :ref:`Simple Service and Client <PySrvCli>` tutorial for Python illustrates how to perform an async service call and retrieve the ``future`` using a loop.

The ``future`` can also be retrieved using a timer or callback, like in `this example <https://github.com/ros2/examples/blob/master/rclpy/services/minimal_client/examples_rclpy_minimal_client/client_async_callback.py>`_, a dedicated thread, or by another method.

> It is up to you, as the caller, to decide how to check on and store ``future`` and retrieve your response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is up to you, as the caller, to decide how to store ``future``, check on its status, and retrieve your response.
```

2 Synchronous calls
-------------------

A synchronous client will block upon sending a request to a service until a response has been received, and then returns the response.
There is no concept of a ``future`` value for sync calls.

> The response will return immediately, making synchronous nodes much simpler to code.

Reviewer: This is not actually true, and is the source of the deadlock.  The call can take arbitrary amounts of time to complete, and during that time the calling thread will be blocked.  It is true that it is simpler to code and reason about, since nothing else will be happening while the call is happening.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps "The response will return directly, ..." is closer to what was intended?

          self.req = AddTwoInts.Request()

      def send_request(self):
          self.req.a = int(sys.argv[1])
          self.req.b = int(sys.argv[2])
          return self.cli.call(self.req)
          # This only works because rclpy.spin() is called in a separate thread below.
          # Another configuration, like spinning later in main() or calling this method from a timer callback, would result in a deadlock.

  def main():
      rclpy.init()

      minimal_client = MinimalClientSync()

      spin_thread = Thread(target=rclpy.spin, args=(minimal_client,))
      spin_thread.start()

      response = minimal_client.send_request()
      minimal_client.get_logger().info(
          'Result of add_two_ints: for %d + %d = %d' %
          (minimal_client.req.a, minimal_client.req.b, response.sum))

      minimal_client.destroy_node()
      rclpy.shutdown()

  if __name__ == '__main__':
      main()

Note inside ``main()`` that the client calls ``rclpy.spin`` in a separate thread.
Both ``send_request`` and ``rclpy.spin`` are blocking, so they need to be on separate threads.
The statement ``from threading import Thread`` makes it possible to create a new thread.

> 2 Sync deadlock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3 Sync deadlock
```

Reviewer 3: Maybe more of a subsection under `2 Synchronous calls`.

---------------

It is not possible to call a service synchronously in a subscription, timer callback or service callback.

> Doing so would block ``rclpy.spin``, causing deadlock: when a client is blocking a thread waiting for a response, but the response can only be returned on that same thread, so the client will never stop waiting.

Reviewer 3: I think this sentence is doing what my other comment was suggesting, talking about a deadlock outside of a callback. I think this topic should come before the topic of deadlocking in callbacks, and maybe be expanded with sample code.

Reviewer 3: Or maybe I misunderstood this sentence. Is it trying to explain the same situation as what [line 132](https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/553/files#diff-51364366b93887d453b19f258f11293fR132) is trying to explain? In which case, it might be redundant.

Author: Apologies, your first comment is right, I mixed the two deadlock situations. If you want to provide sample code for the "not-using-a-separate-thread-to-spin" example, that helps. However, I think the correct example in section 2 is enough for people to recognize that not including the thread spinning would cause deadlock. Would your sample code differ much from that?

Reviewer 3: This would be the sample code:

```python
def main():
    rclpy.init()

    minimal_client = MinimalClientSync()

    response = minimal_client.send_request()
    minimal_client.get_logger().info(
        'Result of add_two_ints: for %d + %d = %d' %
        (minimal_client.req.a, minimal_client.req.b, response.sum))

    rclpy.spin(minimal_client)

    minimal_client.destroy_node()
    rclpy.shutdown()
```

Yeah, it's probably not necessary.

When deadlock occurs, you will not receive any indication that the service is blocked.

> There will be no warning or exception thrown, no indication in the stack trace, and the call will not fail.

Reviewer 3: This probably belongs either at the beginning or the end of this section.

  def main():
      rclpy.init()

      minimal_client = MinimalClientSync()

      spin_thread = Thread(target=rclpy.spin, args=(minimal_client,))
      spin_thread.start()

      response = minimal_client.send_request()
      minimal_client.get_logger().info(
          'Result of add_two_ints: for %d + %d = %d' %
          (minimal_client.req.a, minimal_client.req.b, response.sum))

      minimal_client.destroy_node()
      rclpy.shutdown()

  if __name__ == '__main__':
      main()

Note inside ``main()`` that the client calls ``rclpy.spin`` in a separate thread.
Both ``send_request`` and ``rclpy.spin`` are blocking, so they need to be on separate threads.

1.1 Sync deadlock
-----------------

There are several ways that the synchronous ``call()`` API can cause deadlock.

As mentioned in the comments of the example above, failing to create a separate thread to spin ``rclpy`` is one cause of deadlock.
When a client is blocking a thread waiting for a response, but the response can only be returned on that same thread, the client will never stop waiting, and nothing else can happen.

> Another cause of deadlock is blocking ``rclpy.spin`` by calling a service synchronously in a subscription, timer callback or service callback.

Reviewer 3: It should be possible to work around this deadlock situation by spinning multiple executors, but I do think that's out of the scope of an "intermediate" tutorial. I just wanted us to agree on it.

Author: The exception of multithreaded executors came up a few times so I think it'll be good to leave a note about it here. However, we don't have any documentation on that topic (I think) so I'll open an issue for both the documentation and linking to it here in the future

For example, if the synchronous client's ``send_request`` is placed in a callback:

.. code-block:: python

  def trigger_request(msg):
      response = minimal_client.send_request()  # This will cause deadlock
      minimal_client.get_logger().info(
          'Result of add_two_ints: for %d + %d = %d' %
          (minimal_client.req.a, minimal_client.req.b, response.sum))
  subscription = minimal_client.create_subscription(String, 'trigger', trigger_request, 10)

  rclpy.spin(minimal_client)

Deadlock occurs because ``rclpy.spin`` will not preempt the callback with the ``send_request`` call.
In general, callbacks should only perform light and fast operations.

.. warning::

  When deadlock occurs, you will not receive any indication that the service is blocked.
  There will be no warning or exception thrown, no indication in the stack trace, and the call will not fail.

2 Asynchronous calls
--------------------

> Async calls are entirely safe and the recommended method of calling services.

Reviewer 3: While I believe this is true for using ROS2 with Python/`rclpy`, because its `future` implementation doesn't have a blocking `.get()` API that can cause a deadlock, but this not necessarily true when using ROS2 with C++'s/`rclcpp`'s `std::future`. I wouldn't want this tutorial to go too deep into C++/`rclcpp` either, so maybe reword (or even remove) [lines 26-27](https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/553/files#diff-51364366b93887d453b19f258f11293fR26-R27) to decouple this tutorial from C++/`rclcpp` usage more.

Author: @mm318 do you think there's a need for additional C++ related documentation on the subject? If you have any ideas, an issue or PR would be great!

Reviewer 3: Writing something like the following (`get()`-ing from a `std::future`):

```
void topic_listener_callback(const std_msgs::msg::String::SharedPtr msg)
{
  ...
  auto result = client->async_send_request(...);
  result.get(); // a blocking call, resulting in deadlock
  ...
}
```

is more obvious code smell, as it defeats the whole purpose of an asynchronous call (whereas `rclpy`'s synchronous call() is more unsuspecting). This also more obviously violates conventions of how a callback function should be written (computation time should be short and always bounded, and waiting on a `std::future` does not speak to that).

That being said, I feel like while the conventions of how a callback function should be written is strongly known, it is mostly through word of mouth and not officially written down somewhere, and certainly not very Google-able (there are probably just obscure forum posts that mention it). I think we could update one of the publisher/subscriber tutorial to mention it (associate "callbacks" with words like "short", "trivial", "lightweight", "bounded", etc.).

.. _SyncAsync:

Synchronous vs. asynchronous service clients
============================================

**Level:** Intermediate

**Time:** 10 minutes

.. contents:: Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Introduction
------------

> This guide is intended to warn users of the risks associated with the synchronous client ``call()`` API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide is intended to warn users of the risks associated with the Python synchronous service client ``call()`` API.
```

It is very easy to mistakenly cause deadlock when calling services synchronously, so we do not recommend using ``call()``.

> There are no apparent benefits to using sync calls that outweigh the risk.

Reviewer: This is sort of an odd statement to make without any action associated.  For me as a reader, my first reaction to this would be: why does it exist at all?

I would just remove this statement.

> We provide an example on how to use ``call()`` correctly for experienced users intent on using synchronous calls for whatever reason.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We provide an example on how to use ``call()`` correctly for experienced users who wish to use synchronous calls and are aware of the pitfalls.
```

We also highlight possible scenarios for deadlock that accompany it.

Because we recommend avoiding sync calls, this guide will also address the features and usage of the recommended alternative, async calls (``call_async()``).

The C++ service call API is only available in async, so the comparisons and examples in this guide pertain to Python services and clients.
However, the definition of async given here still applies to C++.

1 Synchronous calls
-------------------

> A synchronous client will block the calling thread when sending a request to a service until a response has been received; nothing else can happen during a call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A synchronous client will block the calling thread when sending a request to a service until a response has been received; nothing else can happen on that thread during the call.
```

              self.get_logger().info('service not available, waiting again...')
          self.req = AddTwoInts.Request()

      def send_request(self):
          self.req.a = int(sys.argv[1])
          self.req.b = int(sys.argv[2])
          return self.cli.call(self.req)
          # This only works because rclpy.spin() is called in a separate thread below.
          # Another configuration, like spinning later in main() or calling this method from a timer callback, would result in a deadlock.

  def main():
      rclpy.init()

      minimal_client = MinimalClientSync()

      spin_thread = Thread(target=rclpy.spin, args=(minimal_client,))
      spin_thread.start()

      response = minimal_client.send_request()
      minimal_client.get_logger().info(
          'Result of add_two_ints: for %d + %d = %d' %
          (minimal_client.req.a, minimal_client.req.b, response.sum))

      minimal_client.destroy_node()
      rclpy.shutdown()

  if __name__ == '__main__':
      main()

Note inside ``main()`` that the client calls ``rclpy.spin`` in a separate thread.
Both ``send_request`` and ``rclpy.spin`` are blocking, so they need to be on separate threads.

> The statement ``from threading import Thread`` makes it possible to create a new thread.

Reviewer: I don't think this statement is totally necessary.  I think by an "intermediate" tutorial, we're pretty much assuming the reader is familiar with Python and how to use threads.  But I don't feel that strongly about it, so I'll leave it to you whether  to remove this line.

1.1 Sync deadlock
-----------------

> There are several ways using the synchronous ``call()`` API can cause deadlock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several ways that the synchronous ``call()`` API can cause deadlock.
```
